---
Title: DBS101 Unit 1
categories: [DBS101, Unit1]
tags: [DBS101]
---

### Topic - Database Systems Fundamentals
----

Data is raw facts, a database organizes data for easy access, and a DBMS is software that manages databases efficiently.

Databases and DBMS improve data management, security, and accessibility but can be costly, complex, and require strong infrastructure.

The database system is now one of the most valuable assets in the digital world. Data drives business decisions, fuels innovations like AI and machine learning, enhances customer insights, and boosts efficiency across industries. Companies use databases to store, analyze, and secure large amounts of data, making informed decisions that give them a competitive edge.

-1950s-1960s (File Systems) – Early databases used simple file systems for data storage with no structured management.
-1970s (Hierarchical & Network Databases) – IBM’s IMS introduced hierarchical models, while CODASYL developed network databases for better data relationships.
-1980s (Relational Databases - RDBMS) – Edgar F. Codd introduced the relational model (SQL-based) for efficient data management, leading to systems like Oracle and MySQL.
-1990s-2000s (Object-Oriented & NoSQL Databases) – Object-oriented databases emerged, followed by NoSQL databases like MongoDB for handling large, unstructured data.
-2010s-Present (Cloud & Big Data Databases) – Cloud databases (e.g., AWS, Google Cloud) and big data technologies (e.g., Hadoop) enable scalable and high-performance data management.

A data model defines how data is structured, stored, and managed in a database. It provides a blueprint for organizing data and relationships.

Types of Data Models:
1. Entity Relationship Model - conceptual framework used to design and represent the structure of a database
2. Semi-structured Data Model - flexible model that does not follow a strict schema like relational databases but still maintains some structure using tags or markers.
3. Object Based Data Models - designed to handle complex data and relationships efficiently.
4. Relational Model - it stores data in tables and defines relationships between the data using key.

